here i am telling you how to get control
of your mind and what does your mind do
quick quick bring out the memes bring
out the memes don't listen to what he's
saying distract everyone start counting
start counting oh my god oh my god we
have to count count count anything but
but listening to this oh my god
okay
so currently writing uh how to overcome
escapism so currently writing this on a
break at my job but i desperately need
help i've been watching dr k for the
past year now and every video has been
super helpful and eye-opening for me
i've taken it all in and understood but
i'm here facing my problems once again
and i want to run away again
my problem is ever since i began working
at an early age i've had difficulty
holding a job as i get got older it got
far worse and i'm worried about being a
burden and not being able to take care
of myself
i'm currently 26 before i used to work
full day shifts every day i was
scheduled and be able to buy the things
i wanted and take care of myself
fast forward to now i'm deep in debt and
can barely stay on the job for more than
an hour and quit because my brain just
can't handle it it assigns too much
value to gaming and sleeping and hanging
with friends on discord or watching
anime i feel like every time i confront
this major issue i always run away
thankfully with amazon i can quit
whenever and join whenever but i can't
keep doing this i need to start paying
my own insurance among among myself and
i want to get out of debt my mind seems
to spiral out of control and i want to
run home and be comfortable in my bubble
i managed to survive day one yesterday
but i fear i won't last much longer
all of dr k's videos just out my brain
and i
when i get here
help
okay
so this is um
unfortunately a pretty common problem
right so i'm going to try to summarize
what i hear or what what i'm sort of
picking up from this
so sometimes in life
we feel paralyzed by
our minds so we know that there are
things that we have to do we know we
need to like get our stuff in order
right
but
despite the fact that like there are
things that we know we need to be doing
our mind wants nothing more than to run
away from our problems
and so what a lot of people may think is
that
okay if i like if my mind if i want to
run away to my from my problems like how
do i find the root cause of this right
so a lot of people i mean not this is
the what we've advocated so here at he
what we've advocated is that you know if
you're struggling to overcome escapism
in your life that you do a lot of
introspective work you dig down really
deep and you find the root of it are you
afraid of failure are you afraid of
commitment like what's the deep-rooted
fear that you can kind of fix
to overcome this escapism
and so i think that's really useful
um but i think that sometimes if you're
in this situation
the best thing to do is not actually to
try to overcome the like the emotional
route of escapism but the best thing to
do is actually learn how to train your
mind so let's take a quick look at this
okay
so what i want y'all to like first start
by looking at is you know
and this happens to everyone right our
mind doesn't always work for us and this
is what makes life really really hard is
that our mind isn't working for our
benefit it has its own
goals and aspirations and desires and
then we can get super stuck because we
have particular goals and desires and
our mind has particular goals and
desires and we're not working towards
the same thing
so as long as our mind is not working
for us life is like super super hard
you're kind of handicapped because
there's a major
you know component part of your body
your mind there's a part of your being
that is supposed to be used for your
benefit which is kind of often doing
whatever whatever it wants to
and like i said sometimes the solution
to that is to go into the mind
and try to fix something on deep inside
the mind
so that the mind starts functioning
properly and sometimes the solution is
actually not to like fix the mind but to
get control of the mind so even if the
mind is afraid of escape
afraid of consequences afraid of failure
wants to escape we can actually control
it and tell it to do what we want it to
do so i'm going to take a quick look at
this post and we'll just sort of notice
this okay
so um
so i've taken it all in and understood
it but here i am facing my problems once
again and i want to run away
so my problem is that i i've had
difficulty holding a job right so that
like what does that exactly mean like
what's going on in your mind
um i used to work full shifts and be
able to buy the things that i wanted but
and take care of myself but now i can't
i'm deep in debt can barely stay on the
job for more than an hour and quit
because my brain just can't handle it
this is a sign of your mind or your
brain controlling you as opposed to the
other way around and this person has
even had some amount of insight right it
assigns too much value to gaming and
sleeping and hanging with friends on
discord or watching anime so this is
like where this person is noticing and
this is awesome because this is what our
what we want from our community right we
want you to notice what your mind is
doing
but every time i i confront this major
issue i always run away right and then
this person goes on to say thankfully i
can quit whenever i want to and join
whenever but i can't doing this this is
not something to be thankful for
right so you've found a job at amazon
that
can tailor to the desires of your
escapist mind so you've even structured
a life for yourself
that allows you to be escapist
right because then you you you what does
your mind tell you it says oh there's no
real consequence of quitting this job
right i can get it back whenever i want
to so we can just we can procrastinate
today you can just quit today you could
take a week off playing on
playing games and watching anime and
things like this and then i can just get
the job next week and so in a weird way
this job is almost like
enabling your escapist mentality right
so we have to be super careful about
what we're grateful for but of course
you're grateful for it because you're
like oh like now i don't actually have
external consequences that force me to
action and if i don't have external
consequences that force me to action
then i can continue like sort of being
escapist and it's like not that big of a
deal
right and so my mind seems to spiral out
of control and i want to run home and be
comfortable in my bubble so normally
when i take this kind of
when i look at this kind of post i would
talk about things like oh you know
where is the source of your escapism
what's going on we can maybe do that
down down the road
but what i really want to talk to y'all
what i really want to talk to you all
today about today is getting control of
your mind
and
i know it sounds kind of weird but like
we don't actually control our mind right
so our mind kind of does what it wants
to like for example i have patients who
have ocd so obsessive compulsive
disorder
and their mind will produce all kinds of
thoughts that they don't want
so our mind values particular things it
tells us to stay away from particular
things it does all kinds of stuff that
you know like isn't necessarily under
our control
and so one of the key things that i want
to share with you all today is how to
get control of your mind
and um because this is something that
it's kind of weird but just in the same
way that you can train your fingers to
play piano or you can train your palate
to you know taste different things or
you can train your legs to be able to
run or your cardiovascular system to be
able to run you can even there are
people who are free divers right that
will train their body to hold their
breath for like 10 minutes at a time see
we can train all manner of different
parts of ourself and one of the things
that we really don't get taught how to
train is our mind so what i'm going to
share with you guys today is nothing
about like sort of fixing the internal
part of the mind so let's say here's our
mind
and in the mind there's something you
know there's something bad in here this
is the fear of escapism down here and so
what a lot of times what we try to do at
healthy gamers we try to teach you okay
how do i take that fear of escapism and
kind of solve it within the mind so that
i'm no longer controlled by that fear
whereas instead what we're going to work
on today is we're not going to do
anything inside the mind we're going to
learn how to control it from the outside
right so we're going to learn how to get
our mind into shape and it can think
whatever it wants to in on the inside it
can it can have ocd in here it can have
depression in here it can have escapism
in here it can have whatever whatever
you want in here
and i know this sounds kind of weird but
like
i've even had success with this
especially with psychosis and psychotic
disorders so these are people like for
example with schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder and they're
hallucinating they're delusional and
what we've sort of discovered in
psychiatry is you can't like really fix
the delusion inside the mind or it's
very difficult to so when i'm sort of
working with patients who have psychosis
or
are delusional instead of trying to fix
the thing inside the mind what i train
them to do
is get control of the mind as a whole
okay
so then the question becomes okay how do
you get control of the mind as a whole
and so this is something that i've
steered a little bit clear of but i
honestly think it's like one of the most
useful concepts that i've ever learned
the reason i've steered clear from it is
because i don't have good scientific
support for it so i tend to steer clear
of some of the more spiritual ideas that
are not scientifically supported but you
know i think it's the best answer
so what i'm going to share with you all
today is the idea of the gunas
so in the yogic
conception of the world there are three
gunas or qualities
and those are
tamas
rajas
and sattvas
it's kind of weird but what they
basically what the yogis did in ancient
india
is
basically classify all things into these
three buckets so these are the
fundamental qualities so tamas is that
which is
inert
slow
dull
okay rajas is that which is active
passionate
dynamic
and satvas is balanced
calm
kind of equilibrium
so i know it sounds kind of weird like
but they just sort of said if you look
at all manner of things you can
basically divide them into these three
qualities so they looked at things like
food
so some foods will lead to inertness
slowness or dullness some foods will be
active
like engage passion or will make you
more dynamic and some foods will make
your mind like calm and balanced and
like sort of help you attain equilibrium
and so if you look at the diets of monks
so like the monk diet
doesn't really matter where you are
right so like you can look at catholic
monks you can look at buddhist monks you
can look at hindu monks essentially all
of them are going to have a more sativic
diet
so there are foods that we can eat that
will sort of encourage this kind of
thing but it's not just foods because
you can look at like discussions on the
internet right so there are going to be
some communities
which are going to push their
um so let's talk about communities
so there's some communities which are
going to lead to inertness in your life
right so like
if you hang out with these people
they're going to make you feel kind of
like dull and inert like your life is
going to be like sort of a blur there
are some communities that will make you
feel active and passionate right so like
politically active communities you know
regardless of what you kind of agree or
disagree with but like if you look at
protesters right so protesters are not
balanced and calm they're like very
active and passionate and dynamic and
you know things like that so like
there's some communities that will make
you dull and inert some things will sort
of activate you and sort of engage your
passion and some things will sort of
calm you down and sort of like
help you attain balance and equilibrium
right so there's like
it's kind of weird but they sort of like
looked at the world and they were like
okay these are the three buckets of
stuff
and so if you're someone who's kind of
stuck in your life like can't get
control of your mind
what we really want you to do is move
from thomas to rajas first and rajas to
saatvas eventually i'm not going to go
into too much more detail but this is
sort of like the goal of what we're
trying to do here okay
so then the question is okay so how do i
get control of my mind so now i'm gonna
now we're gonna get to how to control it
okay so what we're gonna do is kind of a
linear process where we're going to
start with one thing that will enable us
to do the other thing which will enable
us to do the next thing
so the first thing is if you want to
your mind wants so here's you
and here's your mind
and you guys fight
right
so
and this is something in order to
overcome your mind you need something
called willpower
so the first question is how do i get
willpower right like how what's
something that i can do to improve my
willpower so i did a really interesting
study i don't remember the citation
where they looked at teenagers in high
school
and looked at their sugar consumption
and what they essentially found is that
how unhealthy teenagers eat is
influenced by lots of different things
right so your environment and things
like that but there's one variable which
is quickly changeable which will almost
instantly alter your dietary habits this
can anyone guess what's the one thing
that you can do to eat healthier
anyone know
it's not availability
ah very good
sleep excellent
okay so willpower is a diminishing
resource
that's number one we know this okay so
if you guys have heard me talk about the
beat versus cookie study so i'll quickly
uh
explain this study i won't go into too
much detail
so a group of psychologists basically
wanted to measure willpower
and what they did is they took two
participants so group number one and
group number two and in group number one
they were in a waiting room and they
they put a tray of boiled beets in front
of them and then the
in the other group they put a tray of
freshly baked chocolate chip cookies
and they the people were given the
explicit instruction you are not allowed
to eat this this is for the people
there's like a party after after we're
done with this research study so this is
that we're just like putting the stuff
in the room you cannot eat it no eating
okay
so thankfully no one no one was a
degenerate and ate it anyway so every no
one everyone followed the instructions
but then the real test came afterward so
afterward they go into a room and
they're faced with an
impossible task
and they basically saw
how long until people like gave up to uh
uh on the task so like when like you
know how much willpower could they exert
to force themselves into the situation
and what they found is that the
willpower
was lower with the cookie group than it
was with the the beat group
okay and so what they sort of
essentially concluded and based on this
there have been other studies that have
been done is that like when you're
resisting the cookies you're actually
burning your willpower resource and then
you kind of run out of willpower faster
than other people
okay so where does willpower how do we
regenerate it we regenerate with sleep
so if you want to control your mind the
first thing the most important thing
that you can do is sleep
okay so quick tips we had a whole
lecture on sleep recently i think it was
even like close to two hours or
something so definitely go watch that
but i would say you know the key thing
to remember is um waking up
is easier than going to sleep
because you can like you can force
yourself to wake up right and then you
can have caffeine if you really need it
that's okay and then you kind of like
you know spend your day just kind of
chilling or whatever wait until you're
exhausted at night and then you know you
can fall asleep so i i like to also have
a heavy meal before sleep
um we're going to teach you guys a
technique called shavasana today is
meditation
and then the other thing that you can do
before sleep is audiobook helps a lot
like there's other things like weighted
blankets
etc but the first thing that you've got
to do is get your sleep under control
and i don't mean sleep perfectly every
single day i mean that the more you can
improve your sleep the more willpower
you're going to have and the more
willpower you're going to have the
easier it's going to be to do number two
so now you've slept let's say like you
work on it for like three or four days
you're able to sleep one more hour per
night that's like more restful like
we're not saying you have to fix
everything but it's tough for like a
couple days you get into the routine so
just start with sleep okay that's number
one
number two
is food
so what the yogis sort of discovered is
that the simplest way to have a more
balanced mind a less thomasic mind and
by the way giving into escapism is like
a thumbstick mind right so what do i
mean by that it means that
the escapist mentality leads to dullness
and inertness it moves you to inaction
so you're just sitting at home playing
video games instead of working right so
what we want to do is like remove thomas
from our life so if you're like if you
have motivational problems the less dom
sick you become the better off you're
going to be okay
i use this a lot in clinical practice
but there's not good science behind it
there's some good science actually
there's some science but it's it's
you know it's a little bit of a stretch
so adjust your food okay so this is
where like now that we have a little bit
more willpower hopefully what we can do
is make like a couple of healthier
choices i'm not saying go paleo i'm not
saying go keto you can do that if you
want to and you're able to but there's a
lot of stuff that we can do for food
that will actually make our mind like
much more light airy and like able to
work okay
so here's just a couple of things so
move from cola to seltzer
so we don't need that added sugar and
stuff i'm not saying you can't have a
cola from time to time but in general if
you regularly consume soda i'd say make
the shift to seltzer so what i've found
when when trying to help people overcome
like
soda addiction basically
is that the bubbles so like any time
you're trying to overcome an addictive
behavior you have to understand that
overcoming the addictive behavior
involves multiple components so when i'm
trying to help people with smoking
cessation
it turns out that cigarettes are
addictive for three reasons
okay number one is the nicotine this
everyone is aware of but here's the
problem here's where people trip up they
don't realize that nicotine or
cigarettes are addicted for more for
more reasons than nicotine right so the
second thing is that it gives people a
break
so people who smoke cigarettes will take
like smoke bricks and this is a huge
part of like why like cigarettes are so
addictive is like you step out of your
office like you step outside you like
spend five minutes just like chilling
relaxing kind of like having fun
sometimes it's also a source of like
socialization right so like you and your
coworkers go out for a smoke break
that's a huge part of the advantage of a
cigarette the other thing that's kind of
interesting is that there's like uh
what's this called there's a tactile
addiction to to cigarettes
it's kind of weird but a big part of
cigarettes is like fiddling with your
hands so what i find what i found is
that when people are like craving
nicotine right so if you're like craving
nicotine it's interesting because you
can give people gum that will like
supplement the nicotine you can give
them a patch that will supplement the
nicotine but that doesn't cure the
cigarette the smoking cessation right
instead like actually what you what you
kind of discover is that like so
replacing the nicotine if we check this
box people still like relapse and
continue smoking and why is that it's
because smoking is doing more than just
the nicotine
so there's the social aspect there's the
like taking a break like you know once
an hour once every other hour to like go
outside and like have a smoke um there's
the tactile addiction so oddly enough if
i want to help someone stop smoking you
know i may give them nicotine gum sure
but a real plan also involves sunflower
seeds
right
and like meditation breaks
or walks
and the most success i've had sort of
helping people overcome these is to like
target all of the aspects of the
addiction i know it sounds kind of
bizarre but what i found really works
well is you tell people to carry around
sunflower seeds and what they do is they
just like
like sunflower seeds are really tactile
like you do something with your hands so
they'll do every two hours they'll go
outside with a handful of sunflower
seeds they'll crack them it's sort of
like this very like simple like
mind-numbing kind of activity and
they'll like crack them they'll eat the
sunflower seeds they'll you know spit
out the shells and like something about
stepping outside of your office every
two hours chewing some nicotine gum
which tastes awful and then like you
know you you spit the sunflower seeds
and all that kind of stuff out somehow
works
so in that same way if we're trying to
overcome cola addiction
what we want to do is actually like
don't remove all the elements right so
there's the sweetness
but then the carbonation is actually a
big part of it
there's a there's just like a you you
burp afterward and that kind of feels
like good in some ways and like you have
it with food and it helps you burp
especially if you're eating unhealthy
things so there's like weird kind of
physiologic signals that you can sort of
take advantage of that's sort of a
tangent in the like smoking association
and stuff the first thing is like
replace cola with seltzer okay the thing
is just like try to eat healthy stuff i
know it sounds like so simple
and i know that we don't give you guys
concrete solutions so we're gonna kind
of do that today so another like example
is just like apples and peanut butter so
i think the key to
or another kind of nut butter
the key to like starting to eat a little
bit more satwik or a little bit more
like balancing or healthier is to make
small changes that are not don't require
a whole lot of willpower now you have a
little bit more willpower from the sleep
but apples and peter but it's like
delicious it'll like fill you up for a
while it'll increase your satiety it'll
be healthy
i'm not saying you have to use the
organic stuff to start right by all
means like get some peanut butter with
salt in it like it's not that big of a
deal
um i've already talked about oatmeal
before but i think oatmeal is like one
of the most op meals that you can eat
that's quite sathvic
right so oatmeal is going to be high in
fiber
and you can make it taste delicious
like with maple syrup
berries
cinnamon or you can go for a savory
oatmeal which i i didn't you know this
was a big discovery
soy green onion
tomato
and sesame oil
you'd be surprised it's almost like a
congee kind of thing
so like this is where you know you just
start to make like a couple of changes
and it's like what's your what's your
like alternative to this right is like
you're gonna go get like a breakfast
sandwich from like a a fast food
restaurant that's gonna be incredibly
thompson i'm going to slow you down make
you sluggish and you're screwed for the
rest of the day
right i know it's bizarre the savory
oatmeal really catches people like some
people think that this is like you're
insane if you do this but you don't
always want to eat something sweet and
this is like
thing is like this is delicious food
okay
and i'm going to give you guys my last
one my last satwik thing
okay
that i haven't disclosed to y'all before
butternut squash soup
this is the most opi like oatmeal and
butternut squash soup i think are the
most op
meals that you can make
so like butternut squash soup is like
it's delicious i kid you not and maybe
we'll do like a cooking stream or
something one day
basically you just take a butternut
squash you chop it in half you drizzle
it with olive oil and salt you stick it
in the oven you roast it
then what you do is you like scoop out
all the squash which is now soft you
stick it in a pot actually before you
stick it in a pot you take oil
garlic
onions
right so you like fry that up for a
little bit this is actually a little bit
thompson
garlic and onions but you know what
we're getting there
raj sick a little bit it's healthy for
your heart so there's good you know
there's good advantages to it and you
toss all that stuff in there you can put
in whatever else you want to you can put
in
celery you can put in tomatoes
i see you're clear of things like potato
but you can stick some of that stuff in
there you just cook it for a while you
can stick that stuff in the blender and
you can blend it up and then you like
season it right so the cool thing about
soup is like you can add all kinds of
stuff so i'll put a little bit of salt
in there smoked paprika goes a long way
it's going to have a lot of natural
sweetness from the squash and the onions
so you don't need any sugar i don't put
cream and crap like that i know a lot of
recipes will like add cream but like no
you just like it's like a vegetable soup
that's just amazing it's like and then
a squeeze of lime
if you want to go crazy you can put some
stuff like cumin or garam masala or
things like that but i think just
basically with this stuff pepper
you can even stick a jalapeno in there
if you want to like this is delicious
you can also freeze some of this stuff
if you want to right so like you cook
this stuff and like it tastes amazing
and you're getting like
you know tons of nutrients and
vegetables and stuff like that and that
will actually help you a lot so it'll
like clean out your mind okay
there's also a lot of stuff that we've
talked about you can find out this all
in dr k's guide about
gut brain health right so when you start
to eat some of these things it forms
healthy gut bacteria and as you form
healthy gut bacteria they make
neurotransmitter precursors and as you
make neurotransmitter precursors like
tryptophan and stuff like that it can
actually theoretically boost your
serotonin level and things like that so
like there's a lot of like science
behind some of this stuff
but now that we have good sleep we can
eat good food
once we start to eat good food and our
mind becomes less thomsic from that
angle
then what we're gonna do is number three
get out of the house
okay just get out of the house now i
know that weather permitting and
depending on where you are this may not
like if you're in like ontario or like
michigan or something it may be hard to
like get out of the house but as best as
you can like literally get out of the
house so even if it's going to a store
or like whatever like try as best as you
can try to get out of the house or get
out of your room or do whatever you can
if if it's freezing outside you can't do
that you know maybe you can't do that
now but at least then when it starts to
warm up do the best that you can
there's all kinds of important stuff
that happens here that's like
physiologic we've talked about this
before so plant aerosols
are really good for mood
particularly anxiety
there's all kinds of other stuff like
eye accommodation
so our our eyes if you think about the
way that our eyes evolved they did not
evolve to look at things that were like
three feet in front of me all day long
so you actually have these things called
your ciliary muscles which cause your
eyes to contract and or well the ciliary
muscles contract and so that alters the
shape of your your lens and your focal
length and then you kind of like are
looking at close by so the default
position for your eye is not like three
feet away it's actually like further
away so you want to relax your ciliary
muscles um by walking outside that's
like literally all it takes is then your
eyes will naturally relax they'll focus
on far things this can do all kinds of
things like reduce headache
there's just all kinds of good stuff um
there's some evidence that it actually
improves vision over time
but that's a bit
it's like correlative evidence and
cross-sectional
so we're not really sure about that but
get out of the house right so you'll get
some fresh air and things like that you
also get moving
so we don't want to be like sedentary
okay
so the next thing that we're going to do
so now that we've gotten out of the
house and we've gotten a little bit
refreshed we can actually do what most
people are expecting which is meditation
and yoga
so what i'm going to recommend is 20
minutes of meditation practice a day
and i'd start with alternate nostril
breathing
and then do ohm chanting
now you can mix it up if you want to but
if you're if you're coming from the
internet and this is your first exposure
to us these are the two things that i
would recommend once again there's a
whole module about this in dr k's guide
to mental health we teach you everything
that you're going to need to know about
meditation there but these are the two
things that i do like 10 minutes each
next thing that i'm going to say is 10
minutes
you can do more if you want to of surya
namaskar
so this is a set of 10 yoga postures
that'll like super balance you out right
so at the end of the day like this all
of this stuff is only like an hour to a
day like cooking a meal getting out of
the house and doing 30 minutes of
meditation and yoga is like an hour a
day
or sorry two hours a day let's say
and so the interesting thing here is
like this is what it takes to get your
get control of your mind
and if we go back to like this post what
we find is that
um
you know like there's a lot of stuff
here where like i can quit and join i
need to start doing this my mind seems
to spiral out of control i want to run
home and be comfortable in my bubble
like all of these things like you're
losing to your mind like sure we can try
to fix
whatever is inside the mind we can try
to fix this if we want to but if we just
get control of the mind as a whole you
don't have to even overcome your fear of
escapism there's a part of your mind
that will want to escape and you'll just
be like yeah we're not going to do that
today
you don't even have to fix it you can
just have it you can still like want to
escape and it won't work like you'll
just
once you're in control of your mind once
your willpower is there once you're more
sativic and more balanced you'll be able
to resist your desires better
now on to a couple of advanced things
okay so for those of you because now i
understand there are a lot of people in
our community that do this right
apparently we've got a bunch of oatmeal
eaters in chat so if you guys want more
advanced stuff to discipline your mind
eventually you can absolutely go you
know you can increase your meditation
time and things like that but i'm going
to give you guys other practices so
obviously you can sleep better you can
eat more scotic food you can cut out
meat if you want to
cut out oh by the way marijuana and
alcohol are both very very thompson
liquor is actually a little bit more raj
sick but
you know stimulates tend to be raj sick
so you want to cut out all those
substances too
or the other way to put it is if you are
using those substances it makes sense to
me that you're going to have trouble
getting control of your mind
so other things that you can do if you
really want to control your mind
other things you can do we've talked
about this before
no devices
in the toilet
right when you go to a number two you're
just gonna go in with no devices
okay number two
no devices
while eating
okay
all right so
let's talk about this for a second so
notice first of all the rebellion
right so what part of you is rebelling
what part of you is like oh my god i can
eat oatmeal i can go to sleep on time i
can do 30 minutes of yoga
but you're telling me to not use my
phone when i'm taking a dump
like look at the rebellion within you
like what are we talking about here
right like what's the real cost to like
not
using your phone while you're in the
bathroom
or like not watching something while you
eat
like just notice that like that's really
bizarre i'm not asking you to like
you know go into debt i'm not asking you
to donate a kidney i'm not asking you to
you know adopt a child
i'm not like there's no real like cost
here right and this is why i pick this
so specifically because the only cost is
like
your mind rebelling like it's just your
mind is like oh no we can't browse
reddit for like five minutes while i'm
taking it down for 10 minutes so it's
like oh my god how cruel
so this is a this is a really really
prime example of like who's in control
is it your mind or is it you now be
careful because if i say there's no cost
what your mind is gonna do it's gonna be
but like look at all the productive
stuff i can do
look at all i have so many i have so
much anime to watch i have so many of
these youtube lectures on motivation to
watch while i eat it's me being
productive
it's me being productive that's like the
last hallmark of the addicted mind is
like telling you some kind of good
rationalization so it's like no no it
will cost you something no the marijuana
is good for my insomnia and my anxiety
no no we need we need it bro no like we
don't need it we're not like addicted
but like we need it
no i'm sorry we don't need it but like
think about everything you're gonna lose
if you don't get it that's what it is
right that's the thought process
right it's a we don't need it we're not
addicted but it's just like think about
the efficiency the loss and efficiency
oh my god we can't be inefficient
oh sure like we can play video games for
eight hours a day but like we've got to
use those five minutes on the toilet to
research jobs on linkedin which is not
what you do anyway
right
so like these are the two things that if
you want to get control of your mind
just like don't do devices while eating
and this is the bizarre thing is once
you it feels really hard until you do it
and once you actually do it like if you
sit down with like let's say a bowl of
like butternut squash soup and you just
eat it without doing anything it tastes
amazing like you're gonna have a
wonderful experience you're actually
gonna enjoy you don't even need the
device
it feels actually really good like go
grab some apples and peanut butter it's
kind of nice where i live because i'm
i'm down south like in in the southern
united states but like i'm gonna step
outside and and have some apples and
peanut butter and like you just sit
outside in your backyard and you're just
kind of like enjoying yourself like it's
great
right so here are the advanced
techniques
because as it turns out you know there
are a lot of advanced people in our
community so you could try these two
things these are really great willpower
building exercises and generally
speaking we here at hg don't like you
know emphasize the willpower route but
at the same time it is like a really
important route
we sort of emphasize understanding so if
you guys want to get control of your
mind here's how you do it
right we can talk about the escapism and
stuff like that so questions
so you know people are asking about
reading
so notice notice the last bastion of the
mind
when all devices are removed can i read
can i read
so
this is where like sure you can read you
know i think it's okay
but like why do you need to like do you
really need to read for that five or ten
minutes there's like 24 hours in a day
you're sleeping for let's say like six
to nine of them
and like you need the it's like you poop
maybe once a day we're talking about
like a five minute loss here
right
desperate to what like your mind so
notice that desperation notice how much
your mind craves stimulation so this is
the key thing to understand
is that
when you give in to that mind
that's the same thing is like quitting
your job and going home it assigns too
much value to gaming and sleeping and
hanging so like you don't want to give
in to that value
like the more that you give in to what
the mind wants even in the smallest
little way
you are creating a system where it's in
control
so i'd say like don't do any of it and
then your mind is like but then what am
i gonna do and you're like you're gonna
be bored for like five minutes it's
gonna be 300 seconds count to 300 for me
and then your mind is like
but if you literally want to know how do
i get control of my mind there are some
things that it wants and you tell it no
and then it
whines and weedles and tries to trick
you and if you let it trick you you're
not going to control it it's going to
control you
but if you you know
if you do a good job it'll
it'll listen
and then over time it'll start listening
more and then you're going to tell it
like it's going to be like i want to
play a video game but now you've
practiced right now it's trained so
you're going to say sorry we're not
going to play a video game right now
we're gonna actually go exercise for an
hour and then after we're done
exercising then we're gonna play a video
game and then you will discover
something miraculous
which is after you train your mind to
listen to you and then you play the
video game after exercising the video
game is actually more fun than if you
would have like once you like if you go
work out and then you feel like kind of
tired and exhausted
the numbers
if
if your mind is like tired from working
out like the game is gonna be more fun
too
okay
counting game yes look at how look at
how the mind latches on to that
so notice what's happening now chat
here i am telling you how to get control
of your mind and what does your mind do
quick quick bring out the memes bring
out the memes don't listen to what he's
saying distract everyone start counting
start counting oh my god oh my god we
have to count count count anything but
but listening to this oh my god
quickly quickly the memes let's start so
let's let's say something funny
you see this we're now we're counting
numbers oh my god this is so funny let's
did we distract ourselves enough so that
we have to stay we can use the cell
phone in the bathroom now did we
distract ourselves
did we forget what we were talking about
did we did it work
did it work
quick count more count more oh my god oh
my god let's be funny and stop paying
attention because that's what's
happening right you guys see that you're
like oh
your mind is like let's do this it's
gonna be funny i'm gonna i'm gonna type
three and two
so funny so funny so funny so funny now
i'm going to type 33 oh my god it's so
much fun
and thus do we
stop learning and start giving in to the
mind's desire to like meme and entertain
itself
right
okay
questions
yeah so i'll summarize
so let's go ahead and kind of do a quick
summary okay
so
a lot of times when we're confronted
with things like escapism
our goal is to fix the escapism on the
inside of our mind right
so people will say things like oh i'm
you know i want to escape
and then the next thing that sort of
happens we can have we can be depressed
we can be anxious whatever our solutions
tend to be
to try to fix the inside of the mind so
that we no longer have to deal with it
but there's another pathway that we have
which is to not fix what's on the inside
of the mind but just get control of the
mind as a whole so the mind does what we
want it to whether it feels a particular
way or not so i'll give you guys kind of
an example if i'm anxious about going to
a party
what i can do is just i can try to deal
with my internal anxiety so i'm no
longer anxious going to the party or
what i can do
is just command my mind and say hey
we're gonna go to the party anyway it's
okay if you're a little bit anxious like
not a big deal we're gonna do it anyway
and then the mind will be like super
super upset but if we've trained our
mind properly it'll do it anyway so we
don't even need to be like we don't have
to fix the inside of our mind we can
just control it so controlling our mind
involves understanding this concept of
the gunas which is what a lot of this
stuff is baked into but this idea that
different kinds of activities or
exercises or foods that we engage in
will make our mind more inert dull or
slow more active passionate or dynamic
or more balanced calmer in a state of
equilibrium and so how do we do that it
starts with sleep once we sleep more or
sleep healthier we're going to have more
willpower and then we can start making
some of the other changes that we need
to make so if i had started by saying
adjust your diet and you're not sleeping
properly like it's going to be hard to
stick to a diet
right so
now that we're sleeping properly we can
make easy adjustments to our diet we
don't want to eat like super untasty
foods we want to find light healthy
foods that also taste good so the three
things are moving to seltzer moving to
apples and peanut butter oatmeal
butternut squash soup these are just
some examples okay
now that we've eaten well
so our mind is going to be a little bit
more compliant once it gets these kind
of good healthy light foods so we're
going to feel like you know because
sometimes you just don't like i don't
feel like getting out of the house i
just like feel i don't feel like it
right and some of that sentiment that
feeling of not wanting to get out of the
house actually has to do with diet
because if you eat like crap you don't
feel like doing anything but if you eat
like healthy food you're gonna feel like
more energetic
so then get out of the house
and then once you're out of the house
you get a breath of fresh air then you
can start doing like meditation and yoga
you're gonna do 20 minutes of meditation
and 10 minutes of yoga
and then if you've done all that stuff
you've got the basics down you've got a
job you do meditate every day if you're
like one of those chads
then you want to move on to hard mode
then you can do no devices in the toilet
and no devices while eating like don't
watch anything while you're eating just
eat
right and then then everyone goes to
like everyone's totally fine oh yeah
like eating oatmeal like i can handle
that but asking me to give up my device
no no no and then what we see is that
the mind wants it right because what it
wants to avoid is like oh my god like
i need it i need it the mind wants it so
so bad so that's how you get control of
your mind by doing limited things
that sort of make it easy for your mind
to be more compliant right so this is
going to shape this stuff up here is
going to shape the mind and then as we
move down to the advanced techniques now
that the mind is more pliable you'll
have set up a situation where it will
require less willpower because you'll be
sleeping well eating well things like
that
okay
step three become a buddha absolutely
all right
so someone's asking how do you deal with
hours of boredom when you're so used to
stimulation it's torture so you don't
start with hours you start with minutes
right
so like how do you deal with hours of
boredom i'm not sure but here's the
other thing if you get like tons of
stimulation through technology for
example you're bored anyway you're just
stimulated and bored and you're dull and
bored you're like thumb sick and
stimulated it's like terrible right so
you start by by like small amounts of
calculated withdrawal from like
stimulating stuff
start small
it's like how do you lift a hundred
pounds you start by lifting five
same way you do anything in life
uh so is listening to music when leaving
the house fine yeah sure listen to music
it's okay
do that for a while and then
you know
try not listening to music and see which
one you prefer
okay
all right
so is someone saying hi doctor i'm a
neat what do you do this
start with this
right this is where like then your mind
will be in a state to do the other
things
okay
you